## The Expression Problem {#expression-problem}

The [Expression Problem] is a programming design challenge: Given two orthogonal concerns of equal importance, how do we express our programming solution in such a way that neither concern becomes secondary?

[Expression Problem]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expression_problem

An example given in the [c2 wiki] concerns a set of shapes (circle, square) and a set of calculations on those shapes (circumference, area).  We could write this using metaobjects:

~~~~~~~~
var Square = encapsulate({
	constructor: function (length) {
		this.length = length;
	},
	circumference: function () {
		return this.length * 4;
	},
	area: function () {
		return this.length * this.length;
	}
});

var Circle = encapsulate({
	constructor: function (radius) {
		this.radius = radius;
	},
	circumference: function () {
		return Math.PI * 2.0 * this.radius;
	},
	area: function () {
		return Math.PI * this.radius * this.radius;
	}
});
~~~~~~~~

Or functions on structs:

~~~~~~~~
var Square = Struct('Square', 'length');
var Circle = Struct('Circle', 'radius');

function circumference(shape) {
	if (Square(shape)) {
		return shape.length * 4;
	}
	else if (Circle(shape)) {
		return Math.PI * 2.0 * this.radius;
	}
}

function area (shape) {
	if (Square(shape)) {
		return this.length * this.length;
	}
	else if (Circle(shape)) {
		return Math.PI * this.radius * this.radius;
	}
}
~~~~~~~~

Both of these operations make one thing a first-class citizen and the the other a second-class citizen. The object solution makes shapes first-class, and operations second-class. The function solution makes operations first-class, and shapes second-class. We can see this by adding new functionality:

1. If we add a new shape (e.f. `Triangle`), it's easy with the object solution: Everything you need to know about a triangle goes in one place. But it's hard with the function solution: We have to carefully add a case to each function covering triangles.
1. If we add a new operation, (e.g. `boundingBox` returns the smallest square that encloses the shape), it's easy with the function solution: we add a new function and make sure it has a case for each kind of shape. But it's hard with the object solution: We have to make sure that we add a new method to each object.

I> The expression problem originated as follows: Given a set of entities and a set of operations on those entities, how do we add new entities and new operations, without recompiling, without unsafe operations like casts, and while maintaining type safety?
I>
I> The general form of the problem does not concern type safety, but does concern the elegance of the design.

[c2 wiki]: http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?ExpressionProblem

In a simple (two objects and two methods) example, the expression problem does not seem like much of a stumbling block. But imagine we are operating at scale, with a hierarchy of classes that have methods at every level of the ontology. Adding new operations can be messy, especially in a language that does not have type checking to make sure we cover all of the appropriate cases.

And the functions-first approach is equally messy in contemporary software. It's a very sensible technique when we program with a handful of canonical data structures and want to make many operations on those data structures. This is why, despite decades of attempts to write Object-Relational Mapping libraries, [PL/SQL] is not going away. Given a slowly-changing database schema, it's far easier to write a new procedure that operates across tables, than to try to write methods on objects representing a single entity in a table.

[PL/SQL]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PL/SQL

### dispatches from space

There's a related problem. Consider some kind of game involving meteors that fall from the sky towards the Earth. You have fighters of some kind that fly around and try to shoot the meteors. We have an established way of handling a meteors hitting the Earth or a fighter flying into the ground and crashing: We write a `.hitsGround()` method for meteors and for fighters.

WHenever something hits the ground, we invoke its `.hitsGround()` method, and it handles the rest. A fighter hitting the ground will cost so many victory points and trigger a certain animation. A meteor hitting the ground will cost a different number of victory points and trigger a different animation.

And it's easy to add new kinds of things that can hit the ground. As long as they implement `.hitsGround()`, we're good. Each object knows what to do.

This resembles encapsulation, but it's actually called [ad hoc polymorphism]. It's not an object hiding its state from tampering, it's an object hiding its semantic type from the code that uses it. Fighters and meteors both have the same structural type, but different semantic types and different behaviour.

[ad hoc polymorphism]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymorphism_(computer_science)

"Standard" OO, as practiced by Smalltalk and its descendants on down to JavaScript, makes heavy use of polymorphism. The mechanism is known as *single dispatch* because given an expression like `a.b(c,d)`, The choice of method to invoke given the method `b` is made based on a single receiver, `a`. The identities of `c` and `d` are irrelevant to choosing the code to handle the method invocation.

Single-dispatch handles crashing into the ground brilliantly. It also handles things like adjusting the balance of a bank account brilliantly. But not everything fits the single dispatch model.

Consider a fighter crashing into a meteor. Or another fighter. Or a meteor crashing into a fighter. Or a meteor crashing into another meteor. If we write a method like `.crashInto(otherObject)`, then right away we have an antipattern, there are things that ought to be symmetrical, but we're forcing an asymmetry on them. Thiss is vaguely like forcing class `A` to extend `B` because we don't have a convenient way to compose metaobjects.

In languages with no other option, we're forced to do things like have one object's method know an extraordinary amount of information about another object. For example, if a fighter's `.crashInto(otherObject)` method can handle crashing into meteors, we're imbuing fighters with knowledge about meteors.

### double dispatch

Over time, various ways to handle this problem with single dispatch have arisen. One way is to have a polymorphic method invoke another object's polymorphic methods. For example:

~~~~~~~~
var FighterPrototype = {
	crashInto: function (otherObject) {
		this.collide();
		otherObject.collide();
		this.destroyYourself();
		otherObject.destroyYourself();
	},
	collide: function () {
		// ...
	},
	destroyYourself: function () {
		// ...
	}
}
~~~~~~~~

In this scheme, each object knows how to `collide` and how to destroy itself. So a fighter doesn't have to know about meteors, just to trust that they implement `.collide()` and `.destroyYourself()`. Of course, this presupposes that a collisions between objects can be subdivided into independant behaviour.

What if, for example, we have special scoring for ramming a meteor, or perhaps a sarcastic message to display? What if meteors are unharmed if they hit a fighter but shatter into fragments if they hit each other?

A pattern for handling this is called [double-dispatch]. It is a little more elegant in manifestly typed languages than in dynamically typed languages, but such superficial elegance is simply masking some underlyin issues. Here's how we could implement collisions with special cases:

[double-dispatch]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double_dispatch

~~~~~~~~
var FighterPrototype = {
	crashInto: function (objectThatCrashesIntoFighters) {
		return objectThatCrashesIntoFighters.isStruckByAFighter(this)
	},
	isStruckByAFighter: function (fighter) {
		// handle fighter-fighter collisions
	},
	isStruckByAMeteor: function (meteor) {
		// handle fighter-meteor collisions
	}
}

var MeteorPrototype = {
	crashInto: function (objectThatCrashesIntoMeteors) {
		return objectThatCrashesIntoMeteors.isStruckByAMeteor(this)
	},
	isStruckByAFighter: function (fighter) {
		// handle meteor-fighter collisions
	},
	isStruckByAMeteor: function (meteor) {
		// handle meteor-meteor collisions
	}
}

var someFighter = Object.create(FighterPrototype),
    someMeteor  = Object.create(MeteorPrototype);
		
someFighter.crashInto(someMeteor);
~~~~~~~~

In this scheme, when we call `someFighter.crashInto(someMeteor)`, `FighterPrototype.crashInto` invokes `someMeteor.isStruckByAFighter(someFighter)`, and that handles the specific case of a meteor being struck by a fighter.

To make this work, both fighters and meteors need to know about each other. They are coupled. And as we add more types of objects (observation balloons? missiles? clouds? bolts of lightning?), our changes must be spread across our prototypes. It is obvious that this system is highly inflexible. The principle of messages and encapsulation is ignored, we are simply using JavaScript's method lookup system to achieve a result. 