## Getting the Semantics Right

Let's talk about modeling students at a university. Here are a few things we might need to model:

- Students pursue a degree `program` such as "Pre-Med," "Law," "Pharmacy," or "Nursing."
- Students attend on a part-time or full-time `schedule`.

Should there be a `Student` class? Certainly. What about subclassing `Student` with `PreMedStudent`, `LawStudent`, `PharamcyStudent`, and `NursingStudent`? We use these terms in everyday speech, and there are certain behaviours we expect to differ between them. Furthermore, we can expect that we do not have a "many-to-many" relationship between students and programs.

And yet, we could also set up the program as a "has-a" relationship. Maybe each `Student` has a `program` property, and delegates behaviour to its program.

Likewise... `PartTime` and `FullTime` are disjoint, a student is one or the other but not both. So we could have a `PartTimeStudent` and a `FullTimeStudent`. But what if we decide that we also want to have `PreMedStudent`, `LawStudent`, `PharamcyStudent`, and `NursingStudent`? Are we supposed to set up a two-level hierarchy, with classes like `PartTimeNursingStudent` and a `FullTimeNursingStudent` both delegating to `NursingStudent`, and `NursingStudent` delegating to `Student`?

And why not the other way around, e.g. `PharmacyPartTimeStudent` and `NursingPartTimeStudent` both delegating to `PartTimeStudent` that in turn delegates to `Student`? or likewise, why not make `schedule` a property, and delegate behaviour to it so that each `Student` has-a `Schedule`?

This a strong hint that the `program` and `schedule` behaviours should not be placed in a hierarchy with each other: They seem to be peers. They could be implemented by composing metaobjects into prototypes or with delegation to properties.

Now let's consider this entirely made-up case, salespeople in a company:

- There are inside and outside salespeople.
- Inside salespeople work on Major Accounts or Small/Medium Business ("SMB")
- Outside salespeople sell to all customers.
- Inside salespeople sell the full range of products.
- Outside salespeople sell electronic components, computer peripherals, or test equipment.

Now there is a natural hierarchy:

- Salesperson
	- InsideSalesperson
		- MajorAccountsInsideSalesperson
		- SmallMediumBusinessInsideSalesperson
	- OutsideSalesperson
		- ElectronicComponentsOutsideSalesperson
		- ComputerPeripheralsOutsideSalesperson
		- TestEquipmentOutsideSalesperson

This follows from the fact that the variations on an inside salesperson are disjoint from the variations on an outside salesperson. Does this mean that we *must* organize prototypes into a "class hierarchy?" Not necessarily. There are two major factors affecting our choice:

First, *ease of rearrangement vs. likelihood of needing to rearrange*: Even with encapsulation, class hierarchies are inflexible relative to composing metaobjects or delegating to properties. That can be a good thing, in that it acts as a road-bump against someone accidentally implementing a `MajorAccountsOutsideSalesperson`, and it does make our understanding of the constraints of the domain very discoverable in the code.

Second, *invariance of class over the lifetime of an entity*. Do salespeople move between inside and out? From SMB to Major Accounts? Changing classes is relatively rare in OOP style. In the current release of JavaScript, changing an object's prototype is unevenly supported, unexpected by programmers, and incurs a heavy performance penalty. It's usually easier to make a new entity with a new prototype chain that is otherwise a copy of the old entity, or to model something we expect to change as a [state machine]: If people tend to remain as inside or outside salespeople, but change between Major Accounts and SMB more often, we could model the `accountType` as a property and delegate or forward behaviour to it.

[state machine]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite-state_machine

Ultimately, class hierarchies do make semantic sense for some portions of the behaviour we need to model, but we need to consider the semantics carefully and not try to force everything to fit into a hierarchy. Those things that naturally fit can benefit from being modelled as classes, those that do not should be modelled in another way.

Circling back to our fundamental idea, this is why it is important to (a) Have multiple ways to model behaviour with metaobjects, and (b) design our metaobject protocols (encapsulate, composition, delegation, and so forth) to be compatible with each other. The flexibility of mixing and matching state machines, delegation to properties, composing mixins, and prototype chains permits us to design software that is simpler to read, write, and refactor as needed.