## Structural vs. Semantic Typing {#semantic-typing}

A long-cherished principle of dynamic languages is that programs employ "Duck" or "Structural" typing. So we can write a "class" like this:

~~~~~~~~
function CurrentAccount () {
  this._amount = {
    dollars: 0,
    cents: 0
  }
}
CurrentAccount.prototype.amount = function (optionalAmount) {
  if (optionalAmount === undefined)
    return this._amount;
  else this._amount = {
    dollars: optionalAmount.dollars,
    cents: optionalAmount.cents
  };
}

function Cheque (amount, date) {
  this._amount = amount,
  this._date = date;
}
Cheque.prototype.amount = function () {
  return this._amount;
}

function MoneyOrder (amount, number) {
  this._amount = amount,
  this._number = number;
}
Cheque.prototype.amount = function () {
  return this._amount;
}

function depositInstrument (account, instrument) {
  var newAmount = {
    dollars: account.amount().dollars + instrument.amount().dollars;
    cents: account.amount().cents + instrument.amount().cents;
  };

  newAmount.dollars += Math.floor(newAmount.cents / 100);
  newAmount.cents    = newAmount.cents % 100;

  account.amount(newAmount);
}
~~~~~~~~

This works for things that look like cheques, and for things that look like money orders:

~~~~~~~~
var acct = new CurrentAccount(),
    cheque = new Cheque({ dollars: 100, cents: 0 }, new Date()),
    moneyOrder = new MoneyOrder({ dollars: 200, cents: 0 }, 6);

depositInstrument(acct, cheque);
depositInstrument(acct, moneyOrder);
~~~~~~~~

The general idea here is that as long as we pass `depositInstrument` an `instrument` that has an `amount()` method, the function will work. We can imagine that any object with an `amount()` method is has a "type," even if we don't give the type a name like `hasAnAmount`. Programming in a dynamic language like JavaScript is programming in a world where there is a many-many relationship between types and entities.

Further to this, every single function that takes a parameter and uses only its `amount()` method is a function that requires a parameter of type `hasAnAmount`.

There is no checking of this in advance, like some other languages. That doesn't mean we can't check this in advance, languages like `ML` and `Haskell` have no problem "inferring" types from their usage.

This business of writing code and having functions just use it helps flexibility: It encourages the creation of small, independent pieces work seamlessly together. Having written code that works for cheques, it's easy to use the same code with money orders.

### drawbacks

This flexibility has a cost. With our ridiculously simple example above, we can easy deposit new kinds of instruments. But we can also do things like this:

~~~~~~~~
function TaxesOwed (amount) {
  this._amount = amount;
}
TaxesOwed.prototype.amount = function (optionalAmount) {
  if (optionalAmount === undefined)
    return this._amount;
  else this._amount = {
    dollars: optionalAmount.dollars,
    cents: optionalAmount.cents
  };
}

var backTaxesOwed = new TaxesOwed({
  dollars: 10,874,
  cents: 06
});

function Receipt (amount, date, description) {
  this._amount = amount;
  this._date = date;
  this._description = description;
}
Receipt.prototype.amount = function () {
  return this._amount;
}

var rentReceipt = new Receipt({ dollars: 420, cents: 0 }, new Date(), "July Rent");

depositInstrument(backTaxesOwed, rentReceipt);
~~~~~~~~

Structurally, `depositInstrument` is compatible with any two things that have `account()` methods. But not all things that ave `account()` methods are semantically appropriate for deposits. This is why some OO language communities work very hard developing and using type systems that incorporate semantics.

This is not just a theoretical concern. Numbers and strings are the ultimate in semantic-free data types. Confusing metric with imperial measures is thought to have caused the loss of the [Mars Climate Orbiter]. To prevent mistakes like this in software, forcing values to have compatible semantics--and not just superficially compatible structure--is thought to help create self-documenting code and to surface bugs.

[Mars Climate Orbiter]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mars_Climate_Orbiter

### semantic methods

We see above that there is a weakness with writing functions that deposit money into anything that has an `amount()` function. Many things that have an `amount()` function are not "depositable" and/or may not "accept deposits."

In a structural, "duck typed" language, we must is to work at a higher level of abstraction. Why does the function `depositInstrument` directly manipulate the `dollars` and `cents` of amounts? We have some very good arguments against this from a coupling point of view, but we can now see a semantic argument against it: Lots of things have amounts.

So let's revisit how to deposit amounts:

~~~~~~~~
function Cheque (amount, number) {
  this.amount = {
    dollars: amount.dollars,
    cents: amount.cents
  };
  this.number = number;
}
Cheque.prototype.depositableAmount = function () {
  return this.amount;
}

function SavingsAccount (initialBalance) {
  this.amount = {
    dollars: initialBalance.dollars,
    cents: initialBalance.cents
  };
}
SavingsAccount.deposit = function (amountOfDeposit) {
  this.amount.dollars += amountOfDeposit.dollars;
  this.amount.cents   += amountOfDeposit.cents;
  this.amount.dollars += Math.floor(this.account.cents / 100);
  this.amount.cents    = this.account.cents % 100;
  return this;
}
~~~~~~~~

What matters here is that we're defining the semantic methods `depositableAmount` and `deposit`. Now we can write:

~~~~~~~~
function depositInstrument (account, instrument) {
  return account.deposit(instrument.depositableAmount());
}
~~~~~~~~

We can add lots of other functionality like marking that a depositable instrument has been negotiated and so on. But the key point here is that we aren't testing whether an account `is-a AcceptsDeposits`, we're checking whether an account `implements deposit`. Likewise, we don't care whether an instrument `is-a Depositable`, we care whether it `implements depositableAmount`.

Thus, we can later create something like this credit-card that is backed by an account. You can make deposits directly against it at an ATM:

~~~~~~~~
function AccountBackedCard (account) {
  this.account = account;
}
AccountBackedCard.prototype.deposit = function (amountOfDeposit) {
  this.account.deposit(amountOfDeposit);
  return this;
}
~~~~~~~~

An `AccountBackedCard` has no inheritance relationship to an account, but you can deposit funds into it, and the funds are deposited to the underlying account. We've replaced the notion of semantic "types" with the notion of semantic "interfaces."

We avoid the problem of depositing a rent receipt into a statement of back taxes owed by ensuring that whatever entity we use to represent a rent receipt does not have a `depositableAmount` method, and ensuring that whatever entity we use to represent the amount of back taxes owed does not have a `deposit` method.

If we have a `TaxesOwed` entity, we wouldn't want to use a `deposit` method to increase it. Instead, we'd use a method like `addPenalty`. Although the code for addPenalty might look identical to the code for `deposit`, the are different semantically.

In practice, choosing semantically meaningful methods and avoiding structurally meaningful methods (like `.add`)