## Metaobject-1s and Metaobject-2s

As discussed, some languages partition "ordinary" values from functions and methods. Common Lisp, for example, does so, and is called a "Lisp-2" because it has two different namespaces. Scheme, on the other hand, is a "Lisp-1" because it treats functions just the same as all other values. To the extent that JavaScript borrows from Lisp, it borrows from the "Lisp-1" family, because it treats functions as ordinary values.

Object-oriented languages have a similar bifurcation, but it's based on their metaobjects.

A metaobject is a method that confers behaviour on another object, whether by acting as a delegate at run time, by installing behaviour through construction, or by any other mechanism. Thus, templates and prototypes are both metaobjects in JavaScript.

A "Metaobject-1" language is a language where the behaviour of a metaobject is exactly the same as the behaviour it confers on another object. In other words, metaobject-1s have one kind of behaviour.

A "Metaobject-2" language is a language where metaobjects have one kind of behaviour they confer on other objects, and another behaviour they expose for metaprogramming.

Languages like Smalltalk and Ruby are "Metaobject-2" languages out of the box: Their "classes" have a rich set of behaviours for adding, removing, and modifying behaviour that is separate from the methods they confer on instances.

What about JavaScript?

JavaScript's prototypes are Metaobject-1s. The only properties and behaviour a prototype has are the properties and behaviour it confers upon its delegators.

So is JavaScript a Metaobject-1 language? Yes, and no. There are a few Metaobject-2 features such as `Object.create`, `Object.isPrototypeOf` and so forth. In fact, the `Object` object is a rudimentary Metaobject-2.

`'Object` is not as rich a metaobject as you'll find in a language like Smalltalk or Ruby. For example, each Ruby class is a unique metaobject that can create new instances of itself, you can query or update the methods it confers on its instances, you can even override its creation and initialization semantics at any time.

JavaScript functions can do some of these things, but if you use them "out of the box" with the `new` keyword and with the function's body as an initializer, you will have almost none of the flexibility that metaobjects like Smalltalk classes provide.

### javascript meta-object-2s

The bad news is that JavaScript is not a Metaobject-2 language. The good news is that when we want to program in a Metaobject-2 style, it provides all of the Lego blocks needed to build exactly what we want without a programming language author getting "opinionated" and forcing their particular flavour upon us.

That's nice, but what exactly do "Metaobject-2s" buy us? Why should we care?

The short answer is quite simple to grasp, although it is an abstract answer. We'll get into specific and concrete examples in upcoming chapters.

The short answer begins with the observation that we apply OOP to the problem domain to organize our program around units--objects--that encapsulate their internal state and provide a message-handling or method interface to other objects.

When we "buy into" OOP, we're "buying into" the notion that this organization is helpful for understanding and maintaining a program, that it is an advantage to have a program organized along these lines rather than having a heap of functions and procedures operating upon a heap of data structures. We buy into the idea that we can use this organization to reduce the coupling between units.

That's how objects and metaobjects help us write programs for our domain. So how can Metaobject-2s help? Well, what happens when we rise up a level? What happens when we want to program our programming paradigm? If objects responding to methods are the best way to organize our programs, why not use them to organize the way we write our programs?

Okay, *one* example:

We write methods that encapsulate the internal state of domain objects like "chequing accounts," but then when we want to program our metaobjects, we're writing things like:

    var _depositFunds = ChequingAccount.prototype.depositFunds;
    ChequingAccount.prototype.depositFunds = function (funds) {
      if this.validAccount() && funds.validFunds() {
        return _depositFunds.call(this, funds);
      }
      else return ChequingAccount.errors.InvalidOperation(this, funds);
    }

There's something going on about validation, and about writing guards or before filters for methods, but are we really supposed to write things like this out all over our code? Or adopt special function combinators?

Why can't we treat our metaobjects the way we treat our objects, so that if decorating methods with validation is "a thing," we do it by calling a method and letting the metaobject encapsulate the implementation, perhaps like this, where our method has methods like `unshift` for prepending behaviour and `push` for appending behaviour:

    ChequingAccount.depositFunds
      .unshift(function (funds) {
        if !this.validAccount() {
          return ChequingAccount.errors.InvalidOperation(this, funds);
        }
      })
      .unshift(function (funds) {
        if !funds.validFunds() {
          return ChequingAccount.errors.InvalidOperation(this, funds);
        }
      });

If this seems clever for the sake of cleverness, lets ask ourselves: if we decide that we're going to "subclass" `ChequingAccount` with `CryptoCurrencyAccount`, will it just work? Or do we have to carefully examine it to make sure that if we write `CryptoCurrencyAccount.prototyper.depositFunds`, that we also replicate the validation code?

If we were using a metaobject-2 that implemented `.unshift` to add some before-checking, we could see to it that it worked even when the base functionality of a method was overridden.

This is the whole point of encapsulation in OOP, you tell an object what you want done and it handles the corner cases and icky bits for you. In upcoming chapters, we'll implement this and other examples of metaobjects, in the process taking a closer look at how to think about the relationship between objects and their behaviour.