## Data Structures

I> A data structure is a particular way of storing and organizing data in a computer so that it can be used efficiently. Different kinds of data structures are suited to different kinds of applications, and some are highly specialized to specific tasks.--[Wikipedia][data structures]

[data structures]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_structure

A data structure in JavaScript is a value that refers to zero or more other values that represent data. Many people call data structures "containers," suggesting that a data structure contains data. Technically, data structures contain references to data, but "container" is a reasonable metaphor.

In JavaScript, primitives like numbers and strings are not data structures. Arrays and "Objects" are built-in data structures, and you can use them to build other data structures like b-trees. (JavaScript can be confusing: Arrays are also objects, and while a string is not an object, an instance of `String` *is* an object.)

Our interest is in Javascript's objects. Technically, what JavaScript calls an object is actually a *dictionary*:

> An associative array, map, symbol table, or dictionary is an abstract data type composed of a collection of (key, value) pairs, such that each possible key appears at most once in the collection. Operations associated with this data type allow: the addition of pairs to the collection; the removal of pairs from the collection; the modification of the values of existing pairs; and the lookup of the value associated with a particular key.--[Wikipedia][associative array]

[associative array]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dictionary_(data_structure)

Data structures in many languages are passive: You write separate functions to add data to them or to query them for data. For example, we can use dictionaries to make an old-school linked list:[^map]

~~~~~~~~
var emptyValue = {};

function empty () {
	return emptyValue;
}

function cons (value, list) {
	return {
		_a: value,
		_d: list
	};
}

function car (list) {
  return list._a;
}

function cdr (list) {
  return list._d;
}

function map (fn, list) {
  if (list === empty()) {
    return empty();
  }
  else return cons(
    fn(car(list)),
    map(fn, cdr(list))
  );
}

function pp (list) {
  if (list === empty()) {
    return "";
  }
  else return ("" + car(list) + " " + pp(cdr(list))).trim();
}

var oneTwoThree = cons(1, cons(2, cons(3, empty())));

function cubed (n) { return n * n * n; }

pp(map(cubed, oneTwoThree))
  //=> '1 8 27'
~~~~~~~~

[^map]: These function names go back to Lisp 1.5. The [story](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAR_and_CDR) is that it was written for a hardware architecture that had two fast CPU registers, an `address` register and a `decrement` register. The core data type was called a "cons cell," and represented two pointers. One was stored in the address register, the other in the decrement register. The function `car` meant "contents of address register," and the function `cdr` meant "contents of the decrement register." `cons` meant "create a new cons cell." The would have called `map` "`mapcar`," but we're sticking with the more contemporary term.

The "big idea" of programming with data structures is that you have a standardized data structure and you write many functions that operate on the data structure. The data structure is organized by convention: Each function understands the implementation of the data structure intimately and is careful to preserve its intended structure.

Many years ago, people noticed a problem with data structures: They often had several data structures with similar needs but different implementations. Linked lists are particularly fast when prepending items. But if we want indexed access, they are order-n slow. We might implement a `Vector` or `Array` data type for that. We might need an `OrderedDictionary` data structure that provides a key-value store.

Linked lists, vectors, and ordered collections all need an iterator function of some kind. `map` does the job for linked lists based on cons cells. `map` does it for vectors and ordered collections, but you couldn't have two functions with the same name in the old days when names were all global.

One branch of language design concerned itself with managing namespaces. Languages like [Modula-2] provided ways to bundle all the functions for a data structure like a vector into a separate compilation unit with its own namespace. You could do the same thing with an ordered collection, and there are special features for writing code that refers to one, the other, or both without conflict.

[Modula-2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modula-2

Once the namespace conflicts were out of the way, the programming world had everything needed to work with data structures. We can easily emulate this style of development in JavaScript: Use arrays and dictionaries, use `[]` and `for` loops for all access, and write functions to implement any behaviour we need.