## Data Structures

I> A data structure is a particular way of storing and organizing data in a computer so that it can be used efficiently. Different kinds of data structures are suited to different kinds of applications, and some are highly specialized to specific tasks.--[Wikipedia][data structures]

[data structures]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_structure

A data structure in JavaScript is a value that refers to zero or more other values taht represent data. Many poeple call data structures "containers," suggesting that a data structure contains data. Technically, data structures contain references to data, but "container" is a reasonable metaphor.

In JavaScript, primitives like numbers and strings are not data structures. Arrays and "Objects" are built-in data structures, and you can use them to build other data structures like b-trees. (JavaScript can be confusing: Arrays are also objects, and while a string is not an object, an instance of `String` *is* an object.)

Our interest is in Javascript's objects. Technically, what JavaScript calls an object is actually a *dictionary*:

> An associative array, map, symbol table, or dictionary is an abstract data type composed of a collection of (key, value) pairs, such that each possible key appears at most once in the collection. Operations associated with this data type allow: the addition of pairs to the collection; the removal of pairs from the collection; the modification of the values of existing pairs; and the lookup of the value associated with a particular key.--[Wikipedia][associative array]

[associative array]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dictionary_(data_structure)

Data structures in many languages are passive: You write separate functions to add data to them or to query them for data. For example, we can use dictionaries to make a linked list:

~~~~~~~~
var emptyValue = {};

function empty () {
	return emptyValue;
}

function cons (value, list) {
	reurn {
		head: value,
		butHead: list
	};
}