## The "I" Word {#iword}

When we write:

    function Bumblethwaite () {}
    Bumblethwaite.prototype.writeFunction = function (requirements) {
      // ... code to convert formal requirements into a working function
    }

    alex = new Bumblethwaite();

One thing we can say about this code is that all Bumblethwaites can program, and since Alex is-a Bumblethwaite, Alex can program. As we saw above, this is a statement about a formal class, an expectation, delegation, and an ad hoc class. Most programmers don't bother going into all that detail: They say that "Alex is-a Braithwaite," and they say that "Alex inherits writeFunction from Bumblethwaite."

The "is-a" relationship expresses membership in a formal class and with it, a set of expectations. The exact implementation of those expectations--construction, delegation, composition, whatever--is not really part of saying "Alex is-a Bumblethwaite" or part of saying "Alex inherits writeFunction from Bumblethwaite."

Programmers often call this "interface inheritance,"[^java] where the word "interface" is reasonably close to "expectation."

[^java]: Java programmers sometimes say that the word "interface" applies only to the methods and signatures that are inherited, but that is far too narrow a view: An interface is a set of expectations that cover the methods and the behaviour they guarantee.

Sometimes people write code like this because it's a convenient way for objects to share behaviour. They aren't interested in formal classes. For example, you might write something like:

    var WritesFunctionsUsingCombinators = {
      writeFunction: function (requirements) {
        // I a saw a combinator pyramid.
        // It was all-encompassingly unnessesary.
      }
    }

    var raganwald = Object.create(WritesFunctionsUsingCombinators);

Here the object `raganwald` is a member of the ad hoc set "programmers" because it delegates `writeProgram` to `WritesFunctionsUsingCombinators`. But it isn't an `instanceof` anything. We aren't trying to establish a formal set and some expectations for a class of objects. We could, but we're choosing to use delegation as a convenience, as an implementation technique.

This has a common name as well, it's sometimes called "implementation inheritance" when it involved some of the same mechanisms as interface inheritance. (Old-timers will also call it a "was-a" relationship.[^was-a])

[^was-a]: Implementation inheritance "was-a" is named for historical reasons. The metaphor is of a dune buggy: A dune buggy *was* a Volkswagon Beetle, but now it's a dune buggy that uses the Volkswagon's implementation.

Most object-oriented languages tie interface and implementation inheritance together, but it's useful to understand and appreciate the difference between using techniques like delegation for inheriting "interfaces" or "formal classes" vs inheriting "implementations" or "membership in an ad hoc set."