## JavaScript Algebras

As we saw in [Is JavaScript Functional or Object-Oriented?](#f-o-oo), functions are excellent for representing single-purposed units of behaviour such as an action to undo. Objects can obviously model nouns in the domain, but they can also model states and other more complex manifestations of behaviour.

Functions have another role to play in object-oriented programs, one that lies outside of domain behaviour. Functions form the basis for an *algebra of values*.

Consider these functions, `begin1` and `begin`. They're handy for writing [function advice][advice], for creating sequences of functions to be evaluated for side effects, and for resolving method conflicts when composing behaviour:

[advice]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advice_(programming)

~~~~~~~~
var __slice = [].slice;

function begin1 () {
  var fns = __slice.call(arguments, 0);

  return function () {
    var args = arguments,
        values = fns.map(function (fn) {
          return fn.apply(this, args);
        }, this),
        concretes = values.filter(function (value) {
          return value !== void 0;
        });

    if (concretes.length > 0) {
      return concretes[0];
    }
  }
}

function begin () {
  var fns = __slice.call(arguments, 0);

  return function () {
    var args = arguments,
        values = fns.map(function (fn) {
          return fn.apply(this, args);
        }, this),
        concretes = values.filter(function (value) {
          return value !== void 0;
        });

    if (concretes.length > 0) {
      return concretes[concretes.length - 1];
    }
  }
}
~~~~~~~~

Both `begin1` and `begin` create a function by composing two or more other functions. Composition is the primary activity in constructing programs: Making a complex piece of behaviour out of smaller, simpler pieces of behaviour.

In a sense, all programming is composition. However, when we use functions to compose functions, we deliberately restrict the way in which the functions are invoked in relation to each other. This makes it easier to understand what is happening, because the functions we use for composition--like `begin1` and `begin`--have very simple and well-defined ways of constructing new functions from existing functions.

Another valuable use for functions is to *transform* other functions. The [Underscore][u] library includes a few, as does [allong.es]. Here's one of the simplest:

[u]: http://underscorejs.org
[allong.es]: http://allong.es

~~~~~~~~
function not (fn) {
  return function () {
    return !fn.apply(this, arguments);
  }
}
~~~~~~~~

`not` takes a function and return a function that is the logical inverse. When  `fn(...)` returns a truthy value, `not(fn)(...)` returns false. When `fn(...)` returns a falsey value, `not(fn)(...)` returns true.

Functions that compose and transform other functions allow us to build functions out of smaller, interchangeable components in a structured way. This is called creating an *algebra* of functions: A set of operations for creating, composing, and transforming functions.

### an algebra of values

Functions that compose and transform functions into other functions are very powerful, but things do not stop there.

It's obvious that functions can take objects as arguments and return objects. Functions (or methods) that take an object representing a client and return an object representing and account balance are a necessary and important part of software.

But just as we created an algebra of functions, we can create an algebra of objects. Meaning, we can write functions that take objects and return other objects that represent a *transformation* of their arguments.

Here's a function that transforms an object into a proxy for that object:

~~~~~~~~
function proxy (baseObject, optionalPrototype) {
  var proxyObject = Object.create(optionalPrototype || null),
      methodName;
  for (methodName in baseObject) {
    if (typeof(baseObject[methodName]) ===  'function') {
      (function (methodName) {
        proxyObject[methodName] = function () {
          var result = baseObject[methodName].apply(baseObject, arguments);
          return (result === baseObject)
                 ? proxyObject
                 : result;
        }
      })(methodName);
    }
  }
  return proxyObject;
}
~~~~~~~~

Have you ever wanted to make an object's properties private while making its methods public? You wanted a proxy for the object:

~~~~~~~~
var stackWithPrivateState = proxy(stack);

stack.array
  //=> []
stackWithPrivateState.array
  //=> undefined

stackWithPrivateState.push('hello');
stackWithPrivateState.push('there');
stackWithPrivateState.push('javascript');
stackWithPrivateState.undo();
stackWithPrivateState.undo();
stackWithPrivateState.pop();
  //=> 'hello'
~~~~~~~~

The `proxy` function transforms an object into another object with a similar purpose. Functions can compose objects as well, here's one of the simplest examples:

~~~~~~~~
var __slice = [].slice;

function meld () {
  var melded = {},
      providers = __slice.call(arguments, 0),
      key,
      i,
      provider,
      except;

  for (i = 0; i < providers.length; ++i) {
    provider = providers[i];
    for (key in provider) {
      if (provider.hasOwnProperty(key)) {
        melded[key] = provider[key];
      };
    };
  };
  return melded;
};

var Person = {
  fullName: function () {
    return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
  },
  rename: function (first, last) {
    this.firstName = first;
    this.lastName = last;
    return this;
  }
};

var HasCareer = {
  career: function () {
    return this.chosenCareer;
  },
  setCareer: function (career) {
    this.chosenCareer = career;
    return this;
  },
  describe: function () {
    return this.fullName() + " is a " + this.chosenCareer;
  }
};

var PersonWithCareer = meld(Person, HasCareer);
  //=>
    { fullName: [Function],
      rename: [Function],
      career: [Function],
      setCareer: [Function],
      describe: [Function] }
~~~~~~~~

Functions that transform objects or compose objects act at a higher level than functions that query objects or update objects. They form an algebra that allows us to build objects by transformation and composition, just as we can use functions like `begin` to build functions by composition.

JavaScript treats functions and objects as first-class values. And the power arising from this is the ability to write functions that transform and compose first-class values, creating an *algebra of values*.
