## Delegation and Coupling

In [Mixins, Forwarding, and Delegation](#mixins), we saw how to use metaobjects to separate an object's properties from its behaviour. We saw that you can have a 1-1, a 1-many, a many-1, or even many-many relationship between receivers and metaobjects.

We saw four patterns for associating objects with metaobjects:

1. Mixins
2. Private Mixins
3. Forwarding
4. Delegation

The first and fourth patterns, mixins and delegation, use the receiver's context to evaluate method invocations. This is powerful and flexible, in that he metaobject's methods have full access to the reeiver's private state. But this also introduces *coupling*.

The principle value cherished by object-orientated design is *encapsulation*: Objects communicate with each other by invoking methods, not by directly manipulating each other's properties. Although JavaScript does not prevent objects from manipulating each other's properties, it is quite easy to refrain from doing so by convention.

Consider a design that has four kinds of metaobjects, we'll call them `A`, `B`, `C`, and `D`. Objects in the system delegate to one, two, three, or all four metaobjects. (We'll use delegation for our example, but the principle applies equally to mixing behaviour in.)

There are fifteen such "kinds" of objects, those that delegate to `A`, `B`, `AB`, `C`, `AC`, `BC`, `ABC`, `D`, `AD`, `BD`, `ABD`, `CD`, `ACD`, `BCD`, and `ABCD`.

When you make a change to one metaobject, `A`, you have to consider how that change will affect each of the eight kinds of objects that also delegates to `A`. In only one of those kinds, objects that delegate to `A` alone, do you just consider `A`'s behaviour by itself. In objects that delegate to `AB`, `ABC`, `ABD`, and `ABCD`, you have to consider how changes to `A` may interact with `B`, because they both share access to each object's private state. Same for `A` and `C`, and `A` and `D`, of course.

By itself this is not completely revelatory: When objects interact with each other in the code, there are going to be dependencies between them, and you have to manage those dependencies.

Encapsulation solves this problem by strictly limiting the scope of interaction between objects. If object `a` invokes a method `x()` on object `b`, we know that the scope of interaction between `a` and `b` is strictly limited to the method `x()`. We also know that any change in state it may create is strictly limited to the object `b`, because `x()` cannot reach back and touch `a`'s private state.

(There is some simplification going on here as we are ignoring parameters and/or the possibility that `a` is part of `b`'s private state)

However, two methods `x()` and `y()` on the same object are tightly coupled by default, because they both interact with all of the object's private state. When we write an object like this:

    var counter = {
      _value: 0,
      value: function () {
        return this._value;
      },
      increment: function () {
        ++this._value;
        return this;
      },
      decrement: function () {
        --this._value;
        return this;
      }
    }

We fully understand that `value()`, `increment()`, and `decrement()` are coupled, and they are all together in our code next to each other.

Whereas, if we write two metaobjects:

    var Incrementor = {
      increment: function () {
        ++this._value;
        return this;
      }
    };

    // ...hundres of lines of code...

    var Decrementor = {
      decrement: function () {
        --this._value;
        return this;
      }
    };

`Incrementor` and `Decrementor` are tightly coupled to each other, but it isn't obvious if you just look at methods. They just 'happen' to use the same property. And if one object delegates to both objects (or mixes both objects in), then they will be coupled by virtue of their common use of the `_value` private property.

The whole point of objects is to encapsulate private data so that you need only worry about the methods they call. Delegation (and mixing behaviour in) breaks encapsulation. It therefore must be used with caution. Where possible, forwarding (or private mixins) are preferred as they maintain encapsulation.