## Shared Prototypes

In [Singleton Prototypes](#singleton-prototypes), we learned that we can create a very simple object and associate it with a prototype:

~~~~~~~~
var Person = {
  fullName: function () {
    return this.firstName + " " + this.lastName;
  },
  rename: function (first, last) {
    this.firstName = first;
    this.lastName = last;
    return this;
  }
};

var sam = Object.create(Person);
~~~~~~~~

This associates behaviour with our object:

~~~~~~~~
sam.rename('sam', 'hill');
sam.fullName();
  //=> 'sam hill'
~~~~~~~~

There is no way to associate more than one prototype with the same object, but we can associate more than one object with the same prototype:

~~~~~~~~
var bewitched = Object.create(Person);
bewitched.rename('Samantha', 'Stephens');
~~~~~~~~

Although they share the prototype, their individual properties (as access with `this`), are separate:

~~~~~~~~
sam
  //=> { firstName: 'sam', lastName: 'hill' }
bewitched
  //=> { firstName: 'Samantha', lastName: 'Stephens' }
~~~~~~~~

This is very convenient.

### prototype chains

Consider our `HasCareer` mixin:

~~~~~~~~
var HasCareer = {
  career: function () {
    return this.chosenCareer;
  },
  setCareer: function (career) {
    this.chosenCareer = career;
    return this;
  }
};
~~~~~~~~

We can use it as a prototype, of course. But we already want to use `Person` as a prototype. What can we do? Obviously, we can combine `Person` and `HasCareer` into a "fat prototype" called `PersonWithCareer`. This is not great, a general principle of software is that entities should have a single clearly defined responsibility.

Even if we weren't hung up on single responsibility, another issue is that not all people have careers, so we need one prototype for people, and another for people with careers.

The catch is, another principle of good design is that every piece of knowledge should have one unambiguous representation. The knowledge of what makes a person falls into this category. If we were to add another method to `Person`, would we remember to add it to `PersonWithCareer`?

Let's work from two principles:

1. Any object can have an object as its prototype, and any object can be a prototype.
2. he behaviour of an object consists of all of its own behaviour, plus all the behaviour of its prototype.

When we say *any* object can have a prototype, does that include objects used as prototypes? Yes. Objects used as prototypes can have prototypes of their own.

Let's try it. First things first:

~~~~~~~~
var PersonWithCareer = Object.create(Person);
~~~~~~~~

Now let's mix `HasCareer` into `PersonWithCareer`:

~~~~~~~~
extend(PersonWithCareer, HasCareer);
~~~~~~~~

And now we can use `PersonWithCareer` as a prototype:

~~~~~~~~
var goldie = Object.create(PersonWithCareer);
goldie.rename('Samuel', 'Goldwyn');
goldie.setCareer('Producer');
~~~~~~~~

Why does this work?

Imagine that we were writing a JavaScript (or other OO) language implementation. Method invocation is incredibly messy, full of special optimizations and so forth, but perhaps we only have ten days to get it done, so we might proceed like this without even thinking about prototype chains:

~~~~~~~~
function invokeMethod(receiver, methodName, listOfArguments) {
  return invokeMethodWithContext(receiver, receiver, methodName, listOfArguments);
}

function invokeMethodWithContext(context, receiver, methodName, listOfArguments) {
  var prototype;

  if (receiver.hasOwnProperty(methodName)) {
    return receiver[methodName].apply(context, listOfArguments);
  }
  else if (prototype = Object.getPrototypeOf(receiver)) {
    return invokeMethodWithContext(context, prototype, methodName, listOfArguments);
  }
  else {
    throw 'Method Missing ' + methodName;
  }
}
~~~~~~~~

Very simple: If the object implements the method, invoke it with `.apply`. If the object doesn't implement it but has a prototype, ask the prototype to implement it in the original receiver's context.

What if the prototype doesn't implement it but has a prototype of its own? Well, we'll recursively try that object too. Conceptually, this is what happens when we write:

~~~~~~~~
goldie.fullName()
  //=> 'Samuel Goldwyn'
~~~~~~~~

In theory, the JavaScript engine walks up a chain starting with the `goldie` object, followed by our `PersonWithCareer` prototype followed by our `Person` prototype.

### trees

Chaining prototypes is a useful technique, however it has some limitations. Because objects can have only one prototype, You cannot model all combinations of responsibilities solely with prototype chains. The classic example is the "W" pattern:

(drawing of a W)

Let's consider three prototypes to be used for employees in a factory: `Laborer`, `Manager`, and `Probationary`.

All employees are either `Laborer` or `Manager`, but not both. So far, very easy, they can be prototypes. Some laborers are also probationary, as are some managers. How do we handle this with prototype chains?

Well, we can't have `Laborer` or `Manager` share `Probationary` as a prototype, because then *all* laborers and managers would be probationary. And if we make `Probationary` have `Laborer` as its prototype, there's no way to have a manager also be probationary without making it also a laborer, and that's not allowed.

Prototype chains model trees, but most domain responsibilities cannot be represented as trees, so we must either revert to using "fat prototypes," or find another way to represent responsibilities.

### prototypes and mixins

In [Singleton Prototypes](#singleton-prototypes), we saw the pattern of creating a  prototype and then mixing behaviour into the prototype. We also used this technique when we created the `PersonWithCareer` shared prototype.

We can extend this technique when we run into limitations with prototype chains:

~~~~~~~~
var Laborer = {
 // ...
};
var Manager = {
 // ...
};
var Probationary = {
  // ...
};

var LaborerOnProbation = extend({}, Laborer, Probationary);
var ManagerOnProbation = extend({}, Manager, Probationary);
~~~~~~~~

Using mixins, we have created prototypes that model combining labor/management with probationary status.

### caveat programmer

Whether we're using prototype chains or mixins, we're introducing coupling. As discussed in [Mixins, Forwarding, and Delegation](#mixins), prototypes that are brought into proximity with each other (by placing them anywhere in the same chain, or by mixing them into the same object) become deeply coupled because they both have complete access to an object's private internal state through `this`.

To reduce this coupling, we have to find a way to insulate prototypes from each other. Techniques like private mixins or forwarding, while straightforward to use directly on an object or through a singleton prototype, require special handling when used in a shared prototype.

### shared prototypes and private mixins

The standard way for a method to query or update the receiver's state is for it to be evaluated in the receiver's context, so that it can use `this`. This is automatic for simple methods that are defined in the receiver or its prototype.

But when a method has its context bound to another object (via `.bind` or some other mechanism), its state will be independent of the receiver. This is a problem when two or more objects share the same method via a shared prototype.

Let's revisit our "private mixin" pattern:

~~~~~~~~
function extendPrivately (receiver, mixin) {
  var methodName,
      privateProperty = Object.create(null);

  for (methodName in mixin) {
    if (mixin.hasOwnProperty(methodName)) {
      receiver[methodName] = mixin[methodName].bind(privateProperty);
    };
  };
  return receiver;
};

var HasCareer = {
  career: function () {
    return this.chosenCareer;
  },
  setCareer: function (career) {
    this.chosenCareer = career;
    return this;
  }
};

twain = {}
sam = {};

extendPrivately(twain, HasCareer);
extendPrivately(sam, HasCareer);

twain.setCareer('Author');
sam.setCareer('Director');

twain.career()
  //=> 'Author'
sam.career()
  //=> 'Director'
~~~~~~~~

We're privately extending a domain object. When we call `extendPrivately`, a new object is created to hold the private state. We call it once for each object, so each object has its own private state for `HasCareer`

Now let's try it with a shared prototype:

~~~~~~~~
var Careerist = Object.create(null);
extendPrivately(Careerist, HasCareer);

twain = Object.create(Careerist);
sam = Object.create(Careerist);

twain.setCareer('Author');
sam.setCareer('Director');

twain.career()
  //=> 'Director'
sam.career()
  //=> 'Director'
~~~~~~~~

There is only one private state, and it is associated with the prototype, not with each object. That might be what we want, it resembles the way "class methods" work in some other languages. But if we want private state for each object, we must understand that a private mixin cannot be applied to a shared prototype.

### subordinate forwarding and shared prototypes

The mechanism for forwarding works for any object. It could be a metaobject designed just to implement some functionality, it could be another domain object, it works for anything.

One common pattern is called *subordinate forwarding*. When there is a strict one-to-one relationship between a forwarding object and a forwardee, then the forwardee is a *subordinate* of the forwarding object. It exists only to provide behaviour for the forwarding object.

Subordinate forwarding is appropriate when the state encapsulated by the forwardee is meant to represent the state of the forwarding object. Unless we are modeling some kind of joint and several ownership, an investor's portfolio is subordinate to the investor.

When people talk about modeling behaviour with composition, they are often thinking of composing an entity out of subordinate objects, then using mechanisms like forwarding to implement its behaviour.

When a single object forwards to a single subordinate, this works well. But as with private mixins, we must be careful when attempting to use forwarding with a shared prototype: All of the methods in the prototype will forward to the same object, therefore every object that uses the prototype will forward to the same object, not to their own subordinates. Therefore they will not have their own, separate state.

### a pattern for combining private mixins with shared prototypes

There *are* ways to use prototypes and also encapsulate private state with private mixins and/or subordinate forwarding. One is to combine several of the patterns we've already seen.

We'll start with `HasCareer`, our private method. Now we'll define a mixin:

~~~~~~~~
var Careerist = {
  initialize: function () {
    extendPrivately(Object.getPrototypeOf(this), HasCareer);
    return this;
  }
};
~~~~~~~~

The `initialize` method privately mixes `HasCareer` into an object's prototype. If that object has a singleton prototype, each object will have its own private career state. So we'll define our objects to have singleton prototypes.

But each singleton prototype will also have its own prototype. After all, prototypes are objects, and if objects can have prototypes, so can prototypes:

~~~~~~~~
twain = Object.create(Object.create(Careerist)).initialize();
sam   = Object.create(Object.create(Careerist)).initialize();
~~~~~~~~

We can call the `setCareer` and `career` methods on our objects:

~~~~~~~~
twain.setCareer('Author');
sam.setCareer('Director');

twain.career()
  //=> 'Author'
sam.career()
  //=> 'Director'
~~~~~~~~

And our objects will not have methods defined on them, or the private state of our `HasCareer` mixins:

~~~~~~~~
twain
  //=> {}
sam
  //=> {}
~~~~~~~~

We can use a similar technique to implement forwarding with shared prototypes. Singleton prototypes are thus a valuable tool for encapsulating private state while maintaining separation between an object and its behaviour.