## Prototypes are Simple, it's the Explanations that are Hard To Understand {#prototypes}

As you recall from our code for making objects [extensible](#extensible), we wrote a function that returned a Plain Old JavaScript Object. The colloquial term for this kind of function is a "Factory Function."

Let's strip a function down to the very bare essentials:

    var Ur = function () {};

This doesn't look like a factory function: It doesn't have an expression that yields a Plain Old JavaScript Object when the function is applied. Yet, there is a way to make an object out of it. Behold the power of the `new` keyword:

    new Ur()
      //=> {}

We got an object back! What can we find out about this object?

    new Ur() === new Ur()
      //=> false

Every time we call `new` with a function and get an object back, we get a unique object. We could call these "Objects created with the `new` keyword," but this would be cumbersome. So we're going to call them *instances*. Instances of what? Instances of the function that creates them. So given `var i = new Ur()`, we say that `i` is an instance of `Ur`.

For reasons that will be explained after we've discussed prototypes, we also say that `Ur` is the *constructor* of `i`, and that `Ur` is a *constructor function*. Therefore, an instance is an object created by using the `new` keyword on a constructor function, and that function is the instance's constructor.

### prototypes

There's more. Here's something interesting:

    Ur.prototype
      //=> {}

What's this prototype? Let's run our standard test:

    (function () {}).prototype === (function () {}).prototype
      //=> false

Every function is initialized with its own unique `prototype`. What does it do? Let's try something:

    Ur.prototype.language = 'JavaScript';

    var continent = new Ur();
      //=> {}
    continent.language
      //=> 'JavaScript'

That's very interesting! Instances seem to behave as if they had the same elements as their constructor's prototype. Let's try a few things:

    continent.language = 'CoffeeScript';
    continent
      //=> {language: 'CoffeeScript'}
    continent.language
      //=> 'CoffeeScript'
    Ur.prototype.language
      'JavaScript'

You can set elements of an instance, and they "override" the constructor's prototype, but they don't actually change the constructor's prototype. Let's make another instance and try something else.

    var another = new Ur();
      //=> {}
    another.language
      //=> 'JavaScript'

New instances don't acquire any changes made to other instances. Makes sense. And:

    Ur.prototype.language = 'Sumerian'
    another.language
      //=> 'Sumerian'

Even more interesting: Changing the constructor's prototype changes the behaviour of all of its instances. This strongly implies that there is a dynamic relationship between instances and their constructors, rather than some kind of mechanism that makes objects by copying.[^dynamic]

[^dynamic]: For many programmers, the distinction between a dynamic relationship and a copying mechanism is too fine to worry about. However, it makes many dynamic program modifications possible.

Speaking of prototypes, here's something else that's very interesting:

    continent.constructor
      //=> [Function]

    continent.constructor === Ur
      //=> true

Every instance acquires a `constructor` element that is initialized to their constructor. This is true even for objects we don't create with `new` in our own code:

    {}.constructor
      //=> [Function: Object]

If that's true, what about prototypes? Do they have constructors?

    Ur.prototype.constructor
      //=> [Function]
    Ur.prototype.constructor === Ur
      //=> true

Very interesting! We will take another look at the `constructor` element when we discuss [class extension](#classextension).

But let's get back to prototypes:

    function C () {}

    C.prototype.bodyOfWater = 'sea'
    C.prototype
      //=> { bodyOfWater: 'sea' }

    var c = new C();

    Object.getPrototypeOf(c)
      //=> { bodyOfWater: 'sea' }

    C.prototype.isPrototypeOf(c)
      //=> true

`getPrototypeOf` and `isPrototypeOf` are very useful. Let's see how:

    var oldProto = C.prototype;
    C.prototype = { bodyOfWater: 'ocean' };

    Object.getPrototypeOf(c)
      //=> { bodyOfWater: 'sea' }

    C.prototype.isPrototypeOf(c)
      //=> false

    oldProto.isPrototypeOf(c)
      //=> true

Changing a the object bound to a function's `prototype` property doesn't change the prototype for any objects that have already been created with `new`.

### create

You can create objects and assign them prototypes *without* `new`. This object doesn't have a prototype:

    var obj = Object.create(null);
    Object.getPrototypeOf(obj)
      //=> null

This object has the same prototype as an object we create using literal object syntax, or an object we create using `new Object()`

    obj = Object.create(Object.prototype);
    Object.getPrototypeOf(obj)
      //=> {}

    Object.getPrototypeOf(obj) === Object.getPrototypeOf({})
      //=> true
    Object.getPrototypeOf(obj) === Object.getPrototypeOf(new Object())
      //=> true

This object has a prototype of our choosing:

    var ourPrototype = { bodyOfWater: 'ocean' };
    obj = Object.create(ourPrototype);

    ourPrototype.isPrototypeOf(obj)
      //=> true

We can create an object with any prototype we like, without writing a constructor or using `new`.
