## Prototype Chains and Trees

As we've noted repeatedly, JavaScript's built-in metaobjects are called *prototypes*. There are several ways to create an object in JavaScript, and three of them associate the newly created object with a prototype:

1. We can use the `new` operator with a function, e.g. `new Object()`. This newly create object has as its prototype the value of `Object.prototype`, but any function will do, and the newly created object will have the value of the function's `.prototype` property as its prototype.
2. We can use the object literal syntax, e.g. `{ number: 6 }`. The newly create object has as its prototype the value of `Object.prototype`.
3. We can call `Object.create(somePrototype)` and pass in any object. The newly created object will have `somePrototype` as its prototype.
4. We can call `Object.create(null)`, and the newly create object won't have any prototype at all.

No matter how we create an object, we can get its prototype using `Object.getPrototypeOf`:

    function Something () {}

    var object = new Something();

    Object.getPrototypeOf(object) === Something.prototype
      //=> true

JavaScript provides several options for making sense of this arrangement at runtime. We've seen `Object.getPrototypeOf`. Another is `.hasOwnProperty`. Objects that directly or indirectly inherit from `Object.prototype` can use this method to test whether a property is defined in the object itself. To whit:

    var P = {
      foo: 'SNAFU'
    };

    var obj = Object.create(P);
    obj.bar = 'Italia';

    obj.hasOwnProperty('foo')
      //=> false

    obj.hasOwnProperty('bar')
      //=> true

In earlier releases of JavaScript, this could be used to enumerate over an object's domain properties with code like this:

    var ownProperties = [];

    for (var i in obj) {
      if (obj.hasOwnProperty(i)) {
        ownProperties.push(i);
      }
    }
    ownProperties
      //=> [ 'bar' ]

What about objects that don't inherit form `Object.prototype`?

    var P2 = Object.create(null);
    P2.foo = 'SNAFU'

    var obj2 = Object.create(P2);
    obj2.bar = 'Italia';

    obj2.hasOwnProperty('foo')
      //=> TypeError: Object object has no method 'hasOwnProperty'

We can still use this method, we just need to do it indirectly:

    Object.prototype.hasOwnProperty.call(obj2, 'bar')
      //=> true

JavaScript now gives us more elegant tools:

    Object.defineProperty(obj2, 'hidden', {
      enumerable: false,
      value: 'secret'
    });

    Object.keys(obj2)
      //=> [ 'bar' ]

    Object.getOwnPropertyNames(obj2)
      //=> [ 'bar', 'hidden' ]

`Object.keys` returns the objects own properties that are enumerable. `Object.getOwnPropertyNames` returns all of the object's own property names, enumerable or not. And the `for... in...` loop iterates over all of an object's properties, including those  inherited through the property chain.

### trees

The typical JavaScript program uses prototypes for shared behaviour. Objects are organized into an *ontology*:

> Traditionally listed as a part of the major branch of philosophy known as metaphysics, ontology deals with questions concerning what entities exist or can be said to exist, and how such entities can be grouped, related within a hierarchy, and subdivided according to similarities and differences.—[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ontology)

JavaScript's prototypes are very well suited for organizing the behaviour of objects into a tree-like ontology. Let us say that we are modeling DOM entities. All entities have `.name()` and `.document()` methods. We model this with a prototype:

    var EntityPrototype = extendWithObjects(Object.create(null), {
      document: function () {
        return this._document;
      },
      name: function () {
        return this._name;
      }
    });

Now, some entities are containers that hold a list of children. We want our `Container` entities to also have all the methods and properties of an `Entity`, so we give our prototype... A prototype:

    var ContainerPrototype = extendWithObjects(Object.create(EntityPrototype), {
      children: function () {
        return this._children;
      }
    });

Now, anything that has `ContainerPrototype` as its prototype will "inherit" all of its methods: `.children` that it directly owns, as well as `.document` and `.name` that it in turn "inherits" from `EntityPrototype`. This can continue. We don't have to define just methods, a prototype can hold any property or properties:

    var ParagraphPrototype = extendWithObjects(Object.create(ContainerPrototype), {
      _name: 'p';
    });

Just as several concrete objects can share the same prototype, several prototypes can share the same prototype:

    var TextPrototype = extendWithObjects(Object.create(EntityPrototype), {
      text: function () {
        return this._text;
      }
    });

Objects that inherit methods from `TextPrototype` also inherit methods, indirectly, from `EntityPrototype`, just as object that inherit from `ParagraphPrototype` also inherit, indirectly, from `ContainerPrototype` and also `EntityPrototype`.

In this manner, programmers can build elaborate trees of prototypes, with each prototype having a small and carefully focused responsibility. Each concrete domain object inherits from a leaf of the tree.

The drawback of this arrangement is that the various objects and prototypes are now *tightly coupled*. Changes to any one prototype ripple through the tree. The entire arrangement becomes fragile. What looked at first to be highly flexible grows over time to be highly inflexible.