## The "I" Word

In [Caffé Lungo](#lungo), our recap of well-known practices, we used the word "inheritance" because that's the wor dmost people use, and we wanted to focus on JavaScript, not terminology. However in [Prototype Chains and Trees](#trees), we were very careful not to use the word "inheritance." What gives?

The answer is simple. Inheritance, it turns out, is a very imprecise term for describing how metaobjects define behavior for domain objects. Everyone "knows what it means," and what it means varies from language to language and even from library to library within a language.

### a broken metaphor

> At its most fundamental level, inheritance in organisms occurs by passing discrete heritable units, called genes, from parents to progeny.—Wikipedia, [Features of Inheritance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetics#Features_of_inheritance)

In living creatures, inheritance is 100% copying. My son Thomas is tall. Both his mother and I are tall. We have copied parts of our programs--DNA--into his DNA, and thus he is tall. That copying occurred at conception, and thereafter my height has no effect on his height.

As I age, I am actually growing shorter, but he does not grow shorter. Likewise, although my hair turns silver, his hair remains brown. We maintain a social bond, but purely physical traits like height and hair colour are now independent. This is exactly how the [temnplates](#templates) work: Behaviour is shared from one object to another with copying, and thereafter changes to one object cannot affect the other object.

This is not how [prototypes](#trees) work at all. If you change a prototype, the behaviour of all objects "inheriting" from it is changed instantly. There is a dynamic relationship between every domain objects and the prototypes in its prototype chain.

The difference between templates and prototypes is crucial, and the word "inheritance" does a very poor job of disambiguating the two cases.

### a word we've been saving for just the proper occasion

There is a word that describes the relationship between an object and a prototype: **delegation**:[^]

> Most commonly, \[delegation\] refers to a programming language feature making use of the method lookup rules for dispatching so-called self-calls as defined by Lieberman in his 1986 paper "Using Prototypical Objects to Implement Shared Behavior in Object-Oriented Systems". Delegation as a language feature supports the prototype-based programming model.

If I say that "I'm delegating all questions about my finances to my accountant," I am not saying that my accountant is my mother and that I inherited a talent for toting up columns of figures from her.

I'm saying that at the moment you ask me a question, I pass the question on to my accountant, who answers the question in the context of my finances. The word "delegation" implies several things:

1. The behaviour for one entity, the delegator, is handled by another entity, the delegate.
2. The delegator delegates handling the behaviour to the delegate at the time the behaviour is needed.
3. Messages are handled in the context of the delegator, not the delegate.

The third point is important: If the Canada Revenue Agency demands my annual income and I delegate that question to my accountant, the answer that comes back is going to be my annual income, not my accountant's annual income.[^forward]

[^forward]: A similar, yet different relationship is called "forwarding:" If I forward questions about my old koi pond to the people who bought the house and pond from me, they are going to answer the questions in their own context, not mine. Objects that forward behaviour to other objects relinquish the context.

*Delegation* is the correct term for the relationship between an object and its prototype. An object doesn't inherit behaviour from a prototype, it delegates handling *to* a prototype. And that prototype may in turn delegate to its prototype, and so forth along a prototype chain, with each object passing the context along.

### asymmetry in physical laws

Delegation implies a certain symmetry between the delegator and delegate. If I delegate work to my accountant, we are discussing a relationship of equals. I am asked to do some work, I delegate to someone else who will do the work.

That is very different than how template inheritance works. My son doesn't delegate his height to me, he has his own height that is a consequence of some information I passed along to him at conception. This is more like what happens if we have a set of blueprints and we build houses from them. The blueprints define the characteristics of the houses, but if you want to know how many rooms a house has, you look at the house. You don't ask it how many rooms it has and wait for it to delegate the question to the architecture firm that drew up the plans.

Template inheritance implies an asymmetry between an object and the object(s) that determine its behaviour. In common JavaScript, constructor functions act as blueprints, but not delegates. for example:

    var Counter = (function () {
      var i = 0;
      return {
        decrement: function count () {
          return i--;
        },
        increment: function count () {
          return i++;
        },
        peek: function peek () {
          return i;
        },
        reset: function reset () {
          i = 0;
        }
      };
    });

    var c = Counter();

`Counter` obviously defines the behaviour of `c`, but it isn't a delegate.