## Constructing Objects

Metaobjects have one key responsibility: *Defining base object behaviour*. Although it's not strictly required, most object-oriented languages accomplish this by having metaobjects also construct objects. In a language like Ruby, classes are both constructors and metaobjects.

Extending that reasoning to JavaScript, we might think that a function that constructs an object is a metaobject. This is only half the story. For all but naïve objects, the other half of the story is the prototype, because the prototype holds behaviour such as methods that are shared between similar objects.

Therefore, although constructors can be used create objects, we consider the object's prototype to be central to the idea of a metaobject.

### Object.create

As noted in the preamble, `Object.create` creates a new JavaScript object and permits you to specify the prototype:

    var myPrototype = {
      name: "My Prototype"
    }

    var myObject = Object.create(myPrototype);
    Object.getPrototypeOf(myObject)
      //=> { name: 'My Prototype' }

Now that we know this, we can see that the `new` keyword is a kind of shorthand for:

    var pseudoNew = variadic(function (constructor, args) {
      var newObject = Object.create(constructor.prototype);
      var returnedObject = constructor.apply(newObject, args);
      if (typeof(returnedObject) ===  'undefined') {
        return newObject;
      }
      else return returnedObject
    });

We saw in our discussion of objects and properties that there are many cases where we wish to define properties for an object. `Object.create` provides some shorthand for this. Instead of:

    var anotherObject = Object.create(myPrototype);
    Object.defineProperties(anotherObject, {
      age: {
        enumerable: true,
        writable: false,
        value: 12
      }
    });

Or even:

    var anotherObject = Object.defineProperties(Object.create(myPrototype), {
      age: {
        enumerable: true,
        writable: false,
        value: 12
      }
    });

We can write:

    var anotherObject = Object.create(myPrototype, {
      age: {
        enumerable: true,
        writable: false,
        value: 12
      }
    });

And we get the same result:

    anotherObject
      //=> { age: 12 }

`Object.create` is compact and explicit about all the right things, therefore we will use it in preference to the `new` keyword.



*TODO: consider reworking this chapter to revolve around "new"*