## Constructing Objects

As we discussed with respect to prototypes, a desire to create small, focused elements with clear responsibilities leads to creating lots of small prototypes. The desire to eliminate duplication leads to the prototypes being maximally shared, and the result is a thickly branching tree of prototypes, with each object delegating behaviour a chain of prototypes.

This has two drawbacks. The first drawback has already been mentioned: A tree is a fragile architecture for sharing prototypes. Changes to any one prototype affect large numbers of other prototypes and by extension, the objects that depend on the prototype being changed.

The second drawback of a tree is that non-trivial domains cannot usually be represented as trees of functionality. Consider our hypothetical representation of DOM elements: Some elements--like paragraphs and lists--are block elements. Others--like spans and emphasized text--are inline elements.

Obviously, at some point in a paragraph's prototype chain there will be a prototype with block element behaviour. Likewise, at some point in a span's prototype chain there will be a prototype with inline element behaviour. But the span won't delegate to the block prototype, and the paragraph won't delegate to the inline prototype.

All this falls apart when we consider images: An image may appear either as a block element or as an inline element. How does the image's prototype chain include both the block and inline prototypes?

This isn't an isolated case, either. Some elements, like paragraphs, are containers. Some, like hard rules ("HR"), are not containers. How do we resolve the problem that containers can be both blocks (like paragraphs) and inline (like emphasized text) while non-containers can be blocks (like hard rules) or inline (like line breaks).

JavaScript's prototypical delegation can only form trees, and what we've just described is a directed acyclic graph ("DAG"). A tree simply can't model the behaviour we want to define for DOM elements unless we duplicate some behaviour.

### duplication

One option is to duplicate behaviour in prototypes. If our chains look like this:

    var ElementPrototype = {};

    var BlockProtoype = Object.create(ElementPrototype);
    var InlinePrototype = Object.create(ElementPrototype);

    var P = Object.create(BlockProtoype);
    var EM = Object.create(InlinePrototype);

We can create:

    var HR = Object.create(BlockProtoype);

And then we can *copy* the properties from `InlinePrototype` into `HR`:

    extend(HR, InlinePrototype);

Now our `HR` has all the properties of `BlockPrototype` through delegation, and all the properties of `InlinePrototype` through duplication.

This scheme has two drawbacks of its own.

First, if we subsequently add or remove properties from `InlinePrototype`, those changes will not be reflected in `HR`. It may seem fanciful to imagine a domain program making these kinds of changes, but sometimes we load libraries that make these kinds of changes for us. If we program by copying elements from prototypes, we could create a situation where `P` block elements behave differently than `HR` block elements, and worse, we could have a situation where our program becomes very dependent upon the order that libraries and modules are loaded.

Second, we lose our ability to reflect on our prototypes:

    var p = Object.create(P);
    var em = Object.create(EM);
    var hr = Object.create(HR);

    BlockProtoype.isPrototypeOf(p)
      //=> true
    BlockProtoype.isPrototypeOf(hr)
      //=> true

However:

    InlinePrototype.isPrototypeOf(em)
      //=> true
    InlinePrototype.isPrototypeOf(hr)
      //=> false

JavaScript is very strict about the way that `.isPrototypeOf` behaves.

