## The Encapsulation Problem {#encapsulation-problem}

The central form of encapsulation in object-oriented programming consists of objects that invoke methods on each other. Each object's method bodies invoke other methods and/or access the object's own private state. Objects do not read or update each other's private state.

Objects and behaviour have dependencies, but the scope of every dependency is explicitly limited to the methods exposed and implicitly limited to the changes of state that can be observed through the methods exposed.

Unlike Smalltalk, Ruby, or many other OO languages, JavaScript does not *enforce* this encapsulation: Objects are free to read and update each other's properties.

### the closure workaround

It's possible to use a closure to create private state. We saw this in [JavaScript Allongé][ja] and in our recap, [Lungo](#lungo):

[ja]: https://leanpub.com/javascript-allonge

~~~~~~~~
var stack = (function () {
  var array = [],
      index = -1;

  return {
    push: function (value) {
      array[index += 1] = value
    },
    pop: function () {
      var value = array[index];
      if (index >= 0) {
        index -= 1
      }
      return value
    },
    isEmpty: function () {
      return index < 0
    }
  }
})();
~~~~~~~~

This approach has several related problems:

1. A separate instance of each function must be created for each object.
2. It is not open for extension. You cannot define another stack method elsewhere that uses the "private" variables `array` or `index`.
3. You cannot use this directly in a shared prototype.
4. Since the private state is captured in variables, you cannot take advantage of property access features like iterating over properties.
5. You can't vary privacy separately from methods. The code must be written one way for normal methods and another way for methods with private state.

There are workarounds for these problems, but we must be mindful of its limitations.

### private mixins

The [private mixin](#private-mixin) pattern addresses some of the problems with the closure workaround:

~~~~~~~
function extendPrivately (receiver, mixin) {
  var methodName,
      privateProperty = Object.create(null);

  for (methodName in mixin) {
    if (mixin.hasOwnProperty(methodName)) {
      receiver[methodName] = mixin[methodName].bind(privateProperty);
    };
  };
  return receiver;
};

var HasCareer = {
  career: function () {
    return this.chosenCareer;
  },
  setCareer: function (career) {
    this.chosenCareer = career;
    return this;
  }
};

var somebody = {};
extendPrivately(somebody, HasCareer);
~~~~~~~~

Privacy and method concerns are separated. And the private properties are in an object so they behave like all properties. But our private state is still not open for extension, and a private mixin can only be employed in a prototype chain with a workaround of its own. And the private properties are in a separate object from the public properties, so it is not possible to access both at the same time.